The settings API is an API.
I'm not particularly fond of.
But that doesn't mean it's not used what the settings API allows you to do is create a form that will
be handled by WordPress.
This means that you don't have to do what we did in the previous lectures.
You don't have to process the form yourself manage the options or create your own UI in the settings
API is meant to solve all of that.
Now keep in mind that it's completely optional to use the settings API creating your own UI is completely
acceptable.
It's a common root for developers to use.
I highly prefer creating my own UI and processing the data myself.
With that being said you may prefer to use the settings API.
This lecture is meant to introduce you to the API and how it works in the resource section of this lecture.
I provide a link to the settings API plugin handbook chapter.
This page describes the settings API in detail.
If you scroll down they even talk about why you should use the settings API.
The benefits are that it provides visual consistency.
It's future proof and it means less work.
It takes care of handling form submission security measures and data sanitization.
Feel free to read over this chapter.
Let's get started with the settings API.
The very first thing I'm going to do is open the Options page.
I'm going to place the settings API form right below our custom ones so that we can compare the item.
Add a horizontal line separator and then create another form
this form will have two attributes which are action and method.
The method will be post.
The action will be options not P HP.
This is the first difference right here.
The custom UI form has an action of ad men dash post dot P HP request that will be handled and processed
by you shouldn't be sent to the admin dash post stop HP file.
The option stop GHB is exclusively for the settings API.
Keep in mind that WordPress will handle all the forms submissions and data sanitization for you so you'll
have to send the data to the options stop BHP file if you plan on using the settings API.
All right.
Moving on inside this form we're going to call three functions.
The first function is these settings fields.
This function will output some hidden fields that will help with security and help WordPress identify
what group of options are being submitted.
Option groups are an important concept to remember.
It's really confusing to beginners but I'll try my best to explain it.
If you look inside the activation file we create a single option and assign its value to an array.
This array has multiple settings but two WordPress It's all considered one single row in a database.
If we wanted to we could have created two options by calling the add option function twice and storing
these values separately rather than inside of an array that's an acceptable situation to WordPress.
It's what WordPress does with its own settings.
It's why when you open the options database table you saw many individual values rather than arrays
go to the admin dashboard and under the settings menu select any page.
I'm going to select general each field in this form has its own option or database row in the options
table.
For example the site title has its own row the tag line also has its own row.
So on and so forth.
It's a lot of settings but it just means that WordPress considers each value important enough to have
its own row in the options database table.
In our case I don't consider each plugin setting important enough to have its own row in the database.
I just group them all together.
It's easier to manage and remember.
Here comes the problem with creating individual rows for each setting.
Wordpress is completely unaware of certain options are related to one another.
Back to the settings page you'll notice that even though these are separate options they're all grouped
and managed together in this single form.
In order for this to work WordPress requires that they be grouped together.
This is where option groups come in to play even though each value exists in its own row.
They can be grouped together so that WordPress can keep track of everything.
When you create an option group you make it easier for wordpress to know which field belongs to which
section and which section belongs to which page you'll see how we generate sections and fields in just
a second.
Back to the options page.
I'm going to pass in a custom option group called our ops group any options assigned to this group.
We manage.
Here is what I'm telling WordPress now that WordPress knows what group of options are going to be managed.
I can begin creating the fields themselves.
The next function I want to call is do setting sections.
This will output the actual input fields themselves.
We have to tell WordPress what sections we'd like to output.
This function accepts the page name.
Since this is a custom page we can input a custom page name.
The page name will be are arts sections.
We haven't talked about sections but sections are a way to group individual input fields together.
You can have multiple sections so this function will get all sections that are grouped together.
If that seems confusing don't worry you'll see how it works in just a moment.
The last function I want to call is submit button.
This will generate a submit button that is style to work with the form.
It's very simple.
Keep in mind that you don't have to call these functions.
We could if we wanted to create the fields and buttons ourselves however that would defeat the purpose
of using the settings API in the first place since its job is to handle everything for us.
That's it for the forum.
Let's begin registering everything.
The settings API instructs us that we have to register everything from the admin and it hook open this
function now just to keep things organized.
I'm going to separate the registration from the rest of the code.
Create a new file named settings stash API dot P. HP and define the function r settings API
include this file from the ad men it function and then just call this function at the very end of the
function
we can now put all our code inside the newly defined function.
The first step is to register the new settings.
Call the function register setting pass in the option group name which is our ops group and the actual
option which is our ops this function will tell we're pressed at the R ops option is assigned to the
group our ops group.
This function needs to be called for as many options we have.
For example if we have three options we'd call this function three times where the second argument is
for each option.
The group should always be the same.
If all the options are going to be displayed on the same page for instance if I had something like option
2 and option 3 then I would pass that in like so however since we saved our option as an array we only
have one row in the database as a result.
We only have to call this function once.
Now that we've called this function WordPress will know that the r opts options will be handled by the
settings API.
The next step is to create a section a section is a way to group individual fields a single page can
have multiple sections and each section may have multiple fields.
It's just a way to keep things organized.
Since we only have two fields in the array we only really need one section called the function add setting
section this function has four parameters.
The first parameter is a custom Aidid.
I'm going to keep it simple and name it recipe settings.
The second parameter is a readable name which will be output it onto the screen.
Set this to recipe settings.
The third parameter is a function that will be called before the fields are displayed.
Set this to are Settings section
defined this function right below.
An echo out the text.
You can change the recipe settings here.
You can output whatever you want.
Most developers will just output some text that will help users out when filling out the form.
The last parameter is the name of the page.
This will appear on in our case we named it our op section any fields assigned under this section will
appear on the page.
This section is assigned to in the Options page.
We called the due setting section function which will output any sections that are assigned to the page
r op section.
This is how you connect the two.
Now that we have our sections we can begin creating the input fields creating Fields is a pretty straightforward
process right after the section call the function.
Add settings field.
This function has quite a few parameters.
The first parameter is the idea for this field.
Technically you can give this field any idea you'd like but I'd like to assign it to the option that
is relevant to this field will be related to the rating log in required.
Option the second parameter is the label text that will be displayed for this field.
I'm going to use the same text I used in the custom UI form.
The third parameter is the function that will be called for the actual input itself.
I like to use the same name as the I.D. with the addition of underscore input underscore CV where CV
stands for callback you'll see what this function does in a moment.
The fourth parameter is the page that this field belongs to.
This is the same as the name we passed in the do setting section's function the fifth parameter is the
name.
This section belongs to which is the value we pass into the first parameter of the ad setting section.
The next step is to define the function that we called in the third parameter.
This function will output the input field.
I'm going to ground the R ops option like before
then I'm going to borrow this bit of code from the custom form we created.
I want to change two things.
First I want to create an I.D. the I.D. should match the I.D. you assign in the first parameter of the
relative add settings field function
next.
I want to change the name attribute.
It's very important that you name this attribute correctly.
The name will determine what option is updated in the database.
In our case it would be the R ops option.
However this option is not a single value.
If it was then this would be perfectly acceptable to tell WordPress that we want to update a certain
key in the array.
We need to use Square brackets and pass in the name of the key.
In this case it would be rating logging required.
It's very important that you name it correctly or the options will not be updated accordingly.
That's it for the first field.
I'm going to just copy everything from the first field and just update its values accordingly for the
second option.
I'm going to do the same with the function as well.
Your code should look similar to mine.
Once you're finished adding the second field for the second key in the r ops array we can now test the
form refresh the options page.
You should now see the form appearing right below without changing a value.
Try submitting the settings API form you should receive no errors and you should still have the same
values in both forms.
Now try updating one field and save the changes.
You should see the change reflected in both forms.
These two forms do the exact same thing but one is custom and the other is created using the settings
API.
There is no wrong answer here.
You'll find that plugins and themes will use either solution.
Personally I like to create my own you want.
I find it easier to manage but you may not feel that way.
You may like to handle everything through p p without having to worry about the C Ss and JavaScript.
That's perfectly fine.
Use the solution that suits you before I am this lecture.
I want to do one more thing I want to sanitize these values myself using the settings API.
Doing that is very simple.
Go back to the settings API file.
I'm going to minimize everything for a moment so that you can read the code better.
The Register setting function has a third parameter which is optional that can be taken advantage of.
The third parameter accepts a function that will sanitize the input when it submitted the name of this
function will be are ops sanitize to find this function at the very bottom.
This function will be passed in the input this input should have two values.
All I'm going to do is sanitize both these values by running them through the ABS in function.
This will make sure the values are numbers and our absolute lastly you just return the input so that
WordPress can update the option.
That pretty much wraps it up for the settings API.
We will keep working on this plugin but I won't be using the settings API form anymore.
I'm just going to comment it out with HCM l comments.